Tntdb
=====

Author: Tommi MÃ¤kitalo


Introduction
------------

Tntdb is a library for simple database access. There are 2 layers for access -
a database independent layer and a database driver.

The database independent layer offers easy to use methods for working with the
database and also greatly simplifies resource-management. The classes hold
reference-counted pointers to the actual implementation. They are copyable and
assignable. The user can use the classes just like simple values. The resources
they reference are freed, when the last reference is deleted. This happens
normally just by leaving the scope. There is normally no reason to instantiate
them dynamically on the heap.

The driver-layer contains the actual implementation, which does the work. These
classes are database-dependent. The user normally doesn't need to deal with
this.

Each class is defined in a header `<tntdb/Classname.h>`.

Error handling is always done with exceptions. A class `tntdb::Error` is the
base for all exceptions. It is derived from `std::runtime_error`.

Connecting
----------

A connection is represented by the class `tntdb::Connection`. Tntdb offers a
simple function, which connects to the database: `tntdb::connect`. This expects
a parameter of type `std::string`, which is the database url. The database url
consists of the driver name and a database dependent part divided by a colon.

### Example:

    #include <tntdb/connection.h>
    #include <tntdb/connect.h>
    int main(int argc, char** argv)
    {
      tntdb::Connection conn = tntdb::connect("sqlite:mydb.db");
    }

The example above loads the sqlite-driver-library and opens a connection to the
databasefile "mydb.db". At the end of the program the class `tntdb::Connection`
goes out of scope, which closes the connection automatically.

When the database could not be opened a exception is thrown. In the above
example it is unhandled, which makes the program to abort. This is not so nice,
so we add exceptionhandling in the second example:

    #include <tntdb/connection.h>
    #include <tntdb/connect.h>
    int main(int argc, char** argv)
    {
      try
      {
        tntdb::Connection conn = tntdb::connect("postgresql:dbname=db");
      }
      catch (const std::exception& e)
      {
        std::cerr << e.what() << std::endl;
      }
    }

This is a complete example, which just checks, if the database is accessible.

Let's look a little deeper into the driver dependent part.

### The Postgresql driver

The part after the prefix "postgresql:" is passed directly to the C-API
function `PQconnectdb`. You can look into the C-API documentation for details.
Here is a simple example:

    tntdb::Connection conn =
      tntdb::connect("postgresql:dbname=DS2 user=web password=web");

### The Sqlite driver

The sqlite driver supports only sqlite3. No support for sqlite2 is available.
The part after the prefix "sqlite:" is used as a file name for the database. No
additional parameters are needed.

Here is an example:

    tntdb::Connection conn = tntdb::connect("sqlite:mydatabase.db");

### The mysql driver

The part after the prefix "mysql:" is split into the parameters needed for
`mysql_real_connect`. The string is interpreted as a list of parameters
separated by semicolon. Each parameter is a name value pair separated by '='.
The keys are post, flags, app, host, user, passwd, db and unix socket. For
passwd the word password is also accepted. Db may be replaced with dbname or
database. All other keys throw an error. The value may be enclosed in ' or ".
The backslash character disables any special meaning of the next character.

Ok - this is the definition. It is much easier to understand, if you see an
example:

    tntdb::Connection conn =
      tntdb::connect("mysql:dbname=DS2;user=web;passwd=web");

### The oracle driver

To install the oracle driver on linux download the following libraries from
Oracle (you will have to register but they are free of charge):

    oracle-instantclientVERS-basic-VERS.x86_64.rpm
    oracle-instantclientVERS-devel-VERS.x86_64.rpm

where VERS stand for the version number e.g. 11.2

Install them with your package manager.
 
The Oracle driver is not compiled by default when tntdb is compiled, since the
Oracle client libraries are not free. You have to explicitly enable it using the
configure switch --with-oracle. Since the includes and libs of oracle are
normally not installed to standard paths, you need to tell the compiler where to
find the includes and the linker where to find the libraries. This is done by
setting the CPPFLAGS and LDFLAGS.

The call to configure may look like this:

    ./configure --with-oracle --without-mysql CPPFLAGS=-I/usr/include/oracle/11.2/client64 LDFLAGS=-L/usr/lib/oracle/11.2/client64/lib

The connection string has to start with the prefix "oracle:". The username and
password are extracted. They must be passed semicolon separated "user=username"
and "passwd=password". The rest of the string is passed to the OCI function
`OCIServerAttach`. Here is an example for the Oracle Express Edition:

    tntdb::Connection conn =
      tntdb::connect("oracle:XE;user=hr;passwd=hr");

If your Oracle dbms runs on the machine with ip 192.168.0.100 on port 1521 and 
the service id is MYDB then the connection is created using:

    tntdb::Connection conn =
      tntdb::connect("oracle:192.168.0.100:1521/MYDB;user=hr;passwd=hr");


### The replication driver

The replication driver is a special case. It do not handle a specific database
but implements a simple replication at the application level. To use it, the
connection string must start with "replicate:" followed by a list of connection
strings separated by '|'.

A connection is established to each database.

Statements, which just reads data, use the first connection in the list.

Statements, which modify data, executes the statement on each connection. Before
the actual statement is executed, a transaction is started on each connection
unless there is already a active transaction. If the statement fails on one
connection, all transactions are rolled back to ensure consistency.

For modification statement the connection urls are ordered alphabetically to
prevent deadlocks when different applications use the replication driver with
different ordering of database urls.

Note that the connections of the replication driver do not need to use the same
database drivers but you can mix different drivers. For example you can
replicate between a local sqlite and a postgresql database. Of course you are
limited to use sql statements, which each database understand.

And here is a example connect for the replication driver:

    tntdb::Connection conn =
      tntdb::connect("replicate:sqlite:mydatabase.db|postgresql:dbname=DS2 user=web password=web");

This connection reads data from a local sqlite database file and writes to the
sqlite and postgresql database.

Note that this is not really a full scale replication solution. It tries to do
its best to keep the replication up to date as good as possible but not better.

Execute query
-------------

To execute sql statements which do not return data (normally update, insert or
delete statements) `tntdb::Connection` has a method `execute`. It expects a
`std::string` with a sql-statement, which does not return data. It returns the
number of affected rows.

### Example:

    #include <tntdb/connection.h>
    #include <tntdb/connect.h>

    int main(int argc, char** argv)
    {
      try
      {
        tntdb::Connection conn = tntdb::connect("postgresql:dbname=db");
        conn.execute(
          "create table t1(col1 int not null primary key,"
          "                col2 int not null)");
        conn.execute("insert into t1 values(1, 5)");
        unsigned n = conn.execute("update t1 set col1 = col1 + 1");
        std::cout << n << "rows updated" << std::endl;
      }
      catch (const std::exception& e)
      {
        std::cerr << e.what() << std::endl;
      }
    }

Selecting data
--------------

A database is not just for storing data, but it also need to fetch the data.
Tntdb offers several ways to read the data from the database. The most general
is the method `tntdb::Connection::select()`, which expects a query and returns
a object of class `tntdb::Result`.

`tntdb::Result` is a collection of rows. Rows are represented by the class
`tntdb::Row` and these rows are also collections of type `tntdb::Value`. Both
collections (Result and Row) can be accessed with a iterator or through a
index. The class `Value` offers methods for returning the data in different
types. Tntdb does not tell, which type the column is. Value just does its best
to convert the data to the requested type. The User has to know, which data the
column holds.

Fields in a row can be read using the number of occurence but also by using
their name.

Often there are statements, which return exactly one row or only a single
value. For convenience `tntdb::Connection` offers the methods `selectRow` and
`selectValue`. The former returns the first row of a query and the latter the
first value of the first row. Both throw a exception of type `tntdb::NotFound`,
if the query returns no rows at all.

A `tntdb::Value` has a get-template-method, which receives a reference to a
variable, which is filled by the actual value from the database. It returns a
boolean value, which indicates, if the value was not null. In case the value
was null, the method returns false and do not modify the passed variable.

### Example:

    #include <tntdb/result.h>
    #include <tntdb/row.h>
    #include <tntdb/value.h>

    void someFunc(tntdb::Connection conn)
    {
      tntdb::Result result = conn.select("select col1, col2, col3 from table");
      for (tntdb::Result::const_iterator it = result.begin();
           it != result.end(); ++it)
      {
        tntdb::Row row = *it;
        int a;
        std::string b;
        long c;
        bool cIsNotNull;
        row[0].get(a);              // read column 0 into variable a
        b = row.getString("col2");  // read column with name "col2" into variable b
        cIsNotNull = row[2].get(c); // read column 2 into variable c
        std::cout << "col1=" << a << "\tcol2=" << b;
        if (cIsNotNull)
          std::cout << "\tcol3=" << c;
        else
          std::cout << "\tcol3 is null";
        std::cout << std::endl;
      }
    }

    void someOtherFunc(tntdb::Connection conn)
    {
      tntdb::Value v = conn.selectValue("select count(*) from table");
      std::cout << "The table 'table' has " << v.getUnsigned()
        << " rows" << std::endl;
    }

Prepared statements
-------------------

Most of the time the user needs to parameterize the queries.

Because the query has the type `std::string` they can just be stringed together
e.g. with `std::ostringstream`. But this is not recommended. The disadvantage
is, that the user has to deal with special characters to avoid
misinterpretation of data and especially avoid sql injection.

Prepared statements solve this by parsing the statement and getting the
parameters separately. This also offers sometimes significant
performance-advantages, because the user can execute the same statement
multiple times with different parameters. Parsing can be done either at the
client-side or at the serve-side. Tntdb lets the driver decide, if the database
can parse the query and which placeholders the database needs.

To create a prepared statement `tntdb::Connection` has a method prepare, which
takes a query as a `std::string` and returns a object of type
`tntdb::Statement`. The query can contain parameters. Parameters are named
tokens in the query prefixed with a colon. A token can occur multiple times in
a query. The Statement-class has setter-methods to pass parameter-values with
different types.

`tntdb::Statement` offers the same methods for databaseaccess as
`tntdb::Connect`: `execute`, `select`, `selectRow` and `selectValue`. They work
exactly like the methods in `tntdb::Connect`.

### Example:

    #include <tntdb/statement.h>

    void insData(tntdb::Connection conn)
    {
      tntdb::Statement st = conn.prepare(
        "insert into table values (:v1, :v2)");

      st.setInt("v1", 1) // the setters return *this, so they can be
                         // chained easily
        .setString("v2", "hi")
        .execute();

      st.setInt("v1", 2)
        .setString("v2", "world")
        .execute();
    }


You may also omit the explicit mention of the data type. There is a template
method `tntdb::Statement::set`, which determines the right type of the column
from the type of the passed parameter. If you later decide to change the type
of a variable, you don't need to replace the method used to pass the value to
the database. Here is the same example as above using this template method:

    #include <tntdb/statement.h>

    void insData(tntdb::Connection conn)
    {
      tntdb::Statement st = conn.prepare(
        "insert into table values (:v1, :v2)");

      st.set("v1", 1)
        .set("v2", "hi")
        .execute();

      st.set("v1", 2)
        .set("v2", "world")
        .execute();
    }

Working with cursors
--------------------

Connections and prepared statements offer the method `select()`, which fetches
the result and offers random-access to the data. Databases has often more data,
than would fit into the memory of the program. To deal with this, the
innovators of databases have created cursors. They are like pointers to a window
in a resultset, but without holding (and transferring) all data in memory.
Tntdb offers this functionality with `const_iterators` in prepared statements.
The class `std::Statement::const_iterator` represents a database-cursor. It is
a forward only iterator, which returns objects of type `tntdb::Row`, when
dereferenced.

The `begin` method of `tntdb::Statement` starts a new iteration of a cursor.

### Example:

    #include <tntdb/statement.h>

    void printData(tntdb::Connection conn)
    {
      tntdb::Statement st = conn.prepare("select col1, col2 from table");
      for (tntdb::Statement::const_iterator cur = st.begin();
           cur != st.end(); ++cur)
      {
        tntdb::Row row = *cur;
        std::string col1;
        std::string col2;
        row[0].get(col1);
        row[1].get(col2);
        std::cout << "col1=" << col1 << " col2=" << col2 << std::endl;
      }
    }


In the above example the memory-consumption is low even when the table has
millions of rows. When the data would have been fetched with a `tntdb::Result`
all rows has to fit into the main-memory.

The begin-method of `tntdb::Statement` has a optional parameter fetchsize of
type `unsigned`, which is passed to the driver. It may use it as a hint, how
many rows it should fetch at once. The default value is 100.

Using RowReader
---------------

When selecting data, mostly you read all values from the row. If you have many
values, you have to pass the ordinal value of each value separately, which may
be tedious and error prone. To help it and make the code more readable, tntdb
has a helper class called `tntdb::RowReader`, which reads all columns in turn.
It has like `tntdb::Value` a method get, which receives a reference to a
variable.  But this time it returns a reference to the `tntdb::RowReader`, to
make it easy to chain calls. If you need to know, if a value was null, you can
pass a reference to a boolean variable, which tells, if the value was not null.

Each call to the `get` method, increments the column counter of the
`tntdb::RowReader`.

The `tntdb::RowReader` is normally not instantiated explicitly, but a method
`tntdb::Row::reader()` creates a instance of the class, with the initial column
counter, which points to the first column number 0. Optionally you can pass a
different start value to the `reader()` method as a parameter, if you want to
skip some columns.

As an example lets rewrite the `someFunc` function from a previous example:

    void someFunc(tntdb::Connection conn)
    {
      tntdb::Result result = conn.select("select col1, col2, col3 from table");
      for (tntdb::Result::const_iterator it = result.begin();
           it != result.end(); ++it)
      {
        tntdb::Row row = *it;
        int a;
        std::string b;
        long c;
        bool cIsNotNull;
        row.reader().get(a)
                    .get(b)
                    .get(c, cIsNotNull);

        std::cout << "col1=" << a << "\tcol2=" << b;
        if (cIsNotNull)
          std::cout << "\tcol3=" << c;
        else
          std::cout << "\tcol3 is null";
        std::cout << std::endl;
      }
    }


The same works also with a cursor. Lets look at the cursor example using the
`tntdb::RowReader`:

    void printData(tntdb::Connection conn)
    {
      tntdb::Statement st = conn.prepare("select col1, col2 from table");
      for (tntdb::Statement::const_iterator cur = st.begin();
           cur != st.end(); ++cur)
      {
        std::string col1;
        std::string col2;
        cur->reader().get(col1)
                     .get(col2);
        std::cout << "col1=" << col1 << " col2=" << col2 << std::endl;
      }
    }


It is just a matter of taste, which method you prefer or which method fits best
in the current situation. Tntdb tries to make it just as easy as possible.

Starting with tntdb 1.3 we can omit the call to `reader()`. The `tntdb::Row`
and `tntdb::Statement::const_iterator` has now methods to construct a reader
and returning the first value. So we can write:

        ...
        row.get(a)
           .get(b)
           .get(c, cIsNotNull);
        ...

Or with cursor:

        ...
        cur.get(col1)
           .get(col2);
        ...

Transactions
------------

A database wouldn't be a database, if it does not offer transactions.
`tntdb::Connection` has 3 methods to deal with it: `beginTransaction`,
`commitTransaction` and `rollbackTransaction`. But this is not the recommended
way to deal with it. Tntdb has more to offer: the class `tntdb::Transaction`.
This class monitors the state of a transaction and closes the transaction
automatically, when needed. This offers exception-safety without the danger of
open transactions.

`tntdb::Transaction` are instantiated (just like all tntdb-user-classes) as
local variables. The constructor starts a transaction and the destructor rolls
the transaction back, if the transaction is not explicitely committed. This
guarantees, that the transaction is never left open (except when the rollback
fails, but this normally happens only, when the connection is broken anyway and
there is no way to do any harm to the database any more).


### Example:

    #include <tntdb/transaction.h>

    void doSomeModifications(tntdb::Connection conn)
    {
      tntdb::Transaction trans(conn);
      // do some modifications in the database here:
      conn.execute(...);
      conn.prepare("...").set("col1", value).execute();
      trans.commit();

    } // no explicit rollback is needed. In case of an exception, the
      // transaction is rolled back automatically here

Using dates and times
---------------------

Dates and times are a little special when it comes to databases. There is no
standard syntax for specifying dates and times. Therefore tntdb offers 3 helper
classes. `tntdb::Date` can hold a date, `tntdb::Time` a time and
`tntdb::Datetime` both. They can be used just like built in types in tntdb. You
can set host variables and retrieve the value from results returned from the
database.

The classes are simple helper classes which do not have any range checks or
other knowledge of the nature of the data. The constructor of `tntdb::Date`
takes 3 parameters: the year, the month and the day. The constructor takes 3 or
4 parameters: the hour, the minute, the second and a optional millisecond.
`tntdb::Datetime` is created using 6 or 7 parameters. First the 3 parameters of
the date and then the 3 or 4 for the time.

There are also 2 static methods in each of the 3 classes `localtime` and
`gmtime`, which create a object with the current date or time.

Lets look for some examples:

    void dateTimeDemos(tntdb::Connection conn)
    {
      // insert dates and times into table:
      tntdb::Statement ins = conn.prepare(
        "insert into mytable (datecolumn, timecolumn, datetimecolumn)"
        "  values(:date, :time, :datetime)");

      ins.set("date", tntdb::Date(2010, 2, 13))
         .set("time", tntdb::Time(23, 22, 30))
         .set("datetime", tntdb::Datetime(2010, 2, 13, 23, 22, 30))
         .execute();

      // insert the current dates and times into the table
      ins.set("date", tntdb::Date::localtime())
         .set("time", tntdb::Time::localtime())
         .set("datetime", tntdb::Datetime::localtime())
         .execute();

      // retrieve dates and times from a table:
      tntdb::Statement sel = conn.prepare(
        "select datecolumn, timecolumn, datetimecolumn"
        "  from mytable");
      for (tntdb::Statement::const_iterator cur = st.begin();
           cur != st.end(); ++cur)
      {
        tntdb::Row row = *cur;
        tntdb::Date mydate;
        tntdb::Time mytime;
        tntdb::Datetime mydatetime;
        row[0].get(mydate);
        row[1].get(mytime);
        row[2].get(mydatetime);
        // now we have the data from the table in our variables
        std::cout << "date=" << mydate.getIso() << "\n"
                     "time=" << mytime.getIso() << "\n"
                     "datetime=" << mydatetime.getIso() << std::endl;
      }

Using own types
---------------

Tntdb offers also support for custom types. The setter and getter methods in
tntdb are actually templates, which uses 2 operators to actually map types to
the methods. Lets design a own type, which we would like to store in a database
field. To make the example simple, we use a struct with public member
variables. Normally you should always make the member variables private or
protected and offer setter and getter methods:

    struct Myclass
    {
      int a;
      int b;
      Myclass() { } // default constructor is mostly good to have
      Myclass(int a_, int b_)  // ctor to initialize both members
        : a(a_), b(b_) { }
    };

We would like to write the class as a pair of numbers separated with ':' into a
database field. So we define a operator, which formats the structure properly:

    void operator<< (tntdb::Hostvar& hv, const Myclass& myclass)
    {
      std::ostringstream s;
      s << myclass.a << ':' << myclass.b;
      hv.set(s.str());
    }

The operator creates a `std::string` with the content of the class and passes
it to this special helper class `tntdb::Hostvar`, which is defined in the
header `tntdb/statement.h`. This is the only case, where you will explicitly
use the class.

To retrieve data from the database we need another operator:

    bool operator>> (const tntdb::Value& value, Myclass& myclass)
    {
      if (value.isNull())
        return false;
      std::string str;
      value.get(str);
      std::istringstream in(str);
      char ch;
      in >> myclass.a
         >> ch       // skip the ':'
         >> myclass.b;
      return true;
    }

That's all. Now we can use the class just like built ins:

    void customTypeDemo(tntdb::Connection conn)
    {
      // insert myclass into table:
      tntdb::Statement ins = conn.prepare(
        "insert into mytable (mycolumn)"
        "  values(:mycolumn)");

      ins.set("mycolumn", Myclass(17, 45))
         .execute();

      // retrieve myclass from a table:
      tntdb::Statement sel = conn.prepare(
        "select mycolumn from mytable");
      for (tntdb::Statement::const_iterator cur = st.begin();
           cur != st.end(); ++cur)
      {
        tntdb::Row row = *cur;
        Myclass myclass;
        row[0].get(myclass);
        // now we have the data from the table in our variables
        std::cout << "a=" << myclass.a << "\t"
                     "b=" << myclass.b << std::endl;
      }
    }

Using serial columns
--------------------

If tables are designed, you have to create a primary key to identify uniquely a
specific row in the table. Sometimes it is enough to use just some arbitrary
unique number. Databases has support for a automatically generated primary key.
It actually depends on the database, how to create such columns. Since tntdb
has no support for ddl statements (create table ...), there is actually no need
to abstract the creation of these columns. But in applications it is often
needed to know, which number was given to the last inserted row. This is also
depends on the actual database software used.

Tntdb helps retrieving that last insert id. There is a method `long tntdb::Connection::lastInsertId(const std::string& name)`.

There is one problem. Some databases (postgresql, oracle) use named sequences
and a single table may have multiple of them. So to fetch the actual id, we
need to tell the driver, which sequence we want to know. The sequence is
identified by name. Other databases (mysql, sqlite) do not have a identifier.
They will simply ignore the passed name.

This name is by default an empty string, which requests the last incremented
serial number in the current transaction.

Here is a example. We assume a table foo with 2 columns: id and name. The id is
the primary auto incremented key. In postgresql or oracle the sequence is
created with the name `foo_id_seq`:

    void insertData(tntdb::Connection conn)
    {
      tntdb::Statement ins = conn.prepare(
        "insert into foo (name)"
        "  values(:name)");

      ins.set("name", "some name")
         .execute();

      std::cout << "id: " << conn.lastInsertId("foo_id_seq") << std::endl;
      // or mostly you can just omit the serial name
      std::cout << "id: " << conn.lastInsertId() << std::endl;
    }

Connectionpool
--------------

In a long-running program it is often desirable not to connect and disconnect
for every access. One solution is to keep a connection open somewhere and use
is as needed. In a multi threaded application the user has to make sure, that
there is only one thread at a time accessing the database through a single
connection.

To solve this, Tntdb offerers a automatic connectionpool. When the call to
`tntdb::connect` is replaced with `tntdb::connectCached` a special connection
is returned. This connection works just like the normal connection (it is the
same class), but when destroyed, it does not close the connection, but puts the
connection to a free pool. When `tntdb::connectCached` is called again with the
same parameter, the connection is reused. When the old connection is still in
use, `connectCached` just creates a new one.

### Example:

    std::string url = "mysql:db=mydb;host=192.168.0.1";
    tntdb::Connection conn;
    conn = tntdb::connectCached(url);  // connects to the db
    conn = tntdb::Connection();   // puts the connection back to the pool
    conn = tntdb::connectCached(url);  // fetches the same connection
                          // (if not already fetched by another thread)
    tntdb::dropCached();  // closes all free connections, but not ours,
      // because it is hold by 'conn'
    conn = tntdb::Connection();
    tntdb::dropCached();  // closes the connection, because we released it
